The Cold War was fought with words and threats rather than violent action. The two nations at war were the United States and the Soviet Union.
Although the two superpowers had worked as allies to defeat Germany during World War II, tensions between them grew after the war.
Feelings of mistrust and resentment began to form as early as the 1945 Potsdam Conference, where Harry S. Truman and Soviet leader Joseph
Stalin met. Stalin was interested in expanding Russia’s power into Eastern Europe, and the U.S. feared that Russia was planning to take
over the world and spread the political idea of Communism. Truman’s response to the Soviet Union’s sphere of influence and current conditions of war-torn Europe would
become known as the Truman Doctrine. This doctrine proposed to give aid to countries that were suffering from the aftermath of World War II and threatened by Soviet oppression. The U.S. was especially concerned
about Greece and Turkey. Due to the slow progress of Europe’s economic development following WWII, Truman devised another plan to
offer aid called the Marshall Plan. The plan was named after Secretary of State George Marshall due to
Truman’s respect for his military achievements. Truman hoped that by enacting the Marshall Plan two main goals would be accomplished. These goals were:
1. It would lead to the recovery of production abroad, which was essential both to a vigorous democracy
and to a peace founded on democracy and freedom, and which, in the eyes of the United States, the
Soviet Union had thus far prevented.
2. It would support world trade, from which U.S. businessmen, farmers, and workers could benefit.
Truman also stressed the humanitarian intent behind aiding Europe’s war-torn countries. The Marshall Plan
was estimated to cost the United States approximately $22 billion, but was later scaled down to cost $13 billion
after the plan was put into action. Secretary of State George Marshall presented the plan at Harvard University
in June 1947, and it was met with acceptance by military leaders and political advisers.
Although the idea behind developing the Marshall Plan had good intentions of offering aid to people in postwar Europe, however, some
people did not receive the Marshall Plan with the same perception as Harry S. Truman. As you read the following documents you will see
multiple accounts of perspectives of the Marshall Plan. Take into account what you already know about the Cold War and the countries involved
and apply that information to help you answer the following.